Data from a national survey published in JAMA Internal Medicine showed that most pharmacists experienced a drug shortage in the previous year and hoarded available supply as a common mitigation strategy.
“In severe cases, the authors noted, “shortages require clinicians to decide which patients receive needed medications and which patients do not,” which can lead to rationing drugs among patients. They suggested that, as a result, systemic approaches are needed to address drug shortages and consequent drug rationing.
Researchers from the University of Chicago conducted a survey of more than 700 pharmacy practice managers and pharmacy leaders to determine current drug allocation and rationing practices across U.S. hospitals during shortages. All of the respondents reported experiencing drug shortages in the preceding year, and 69.2% reported more than 50 shortages. Also, the majority (92.4%) reported having minimal notice (<1 mo) from the time they became aware of the shortage to when it actively occurred at their institution. Almost 40% of respondents also reported having no administrative mechanism to respond to a shortage.
The most common medication shortages were for analgesics (including opioids, 98%), nonopioid anesthetics/sedatives (87.2%), antibiotics (90.6%), cardiac medications (84.9%), chemotherapeutics (62.9%), and I.V. fluids (52.2%). When asked about mitigation strategies, 92.4% said they maintained a shortage list, 84.3% substituted with a similar drug, 81.3% hoarded available supply, and 79.6% used a central pharmacy-controlled distribution. Other mitigation strategies included maintaining a list of medications not to be shared with other hospitals and appointing a pharmacist or creating a standing committee to help manage drug shortages.
Approximately 34% of respondents reported an episode of rationing within the past year, with rationing being more common at larger hospitals and academic institutions. The survey results indicated that few patients were informed of drug rationing.
The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) maintains a list of current drug shortages on its website; as of May 3, there were 230 active drug shortages on the list. In late 2018, ASHP published an updated guideline on managing drug product shortages that discusses areas such as planning for and responding appropriately to a shortage.
The FDA and CDC websites also contain shortage information. FDA’s site includes a drug shortage database and other information to help clinicians manage drug shortages. CDC’s site contains a list of vaccines that are in short supply and specific notes on how long the shortages are expected to last. Clinicians are encouraged to access these resources to help with planning and managing drug shortages.
For the full article, please visit www.pharmacytoday.org for the June 2019 issue of Pharmacy Today.