With measles cases climbing to nearly 2,000 this summer, awareness about the MMR vaccine is more significant than it has been in decades—the same goes for access.
“We’ve made it a point to issue news releases nationally and in outbreak areas to remind patients about their options and that they can protect themselves from measles,” said Summer Kerley, vice president of clinical services at RiteAid.
Pharmacists can administer the MMR vaccine in most states depending on practice laws, although age restrictions differ by individual state law, as does whether a protocol or a written prescription is necessary.
Measles has spread to 28 states so far. Measles outbreaks, which are defined as three or more cases, are currently active in New York, California, Michigan, New Jersey, Georgia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Washington. RiteAid has issued local releases in most of those areas and placed extra signage in and out of stores to let customers and the community know that the MMR vaccination is available in the pharmacy.
“Our pharmacists were provided educational support, [too], including a FAQ to ensure they [are] prepared to answer questions,” said Kerley. “Pharmacists have been asked to help patients determine if they had received the vaccines previously, and with registry access and outreach to providers, our pharmacists helped to determine immunization history for patients.”
Only about one-half of all jurisdictions require pharmacists to report immunizations to a registry, although most pharmacists do it voluntarily or as best practice.
Indiana’s standing order
Pharmacists in Indiana have been able to administer MMR vaccinations with a physician protocol for some time. But in late April—when measles cases were quickly on the rise across the country—the Indiana State Department of Health issued a statewide standing order allowing pharmacists to give the vaccination without patients being required to see their health care provider for a prescription.
“We’ve had immunization task force meetings since September, and a lot was focused on HPV vaccinations,” said Veronica Vernon, PharmD, BCPS, BCACP, NCMP, Indiana Pharmacists Association’s legislative and regulatory chair. “Then the measles outbreak happened, and it ignited this standing order.”
She said the standing order has now expanded access to the MMR vaccination to any pharmacy in the state.
According to CDC, most of the measles cases in the United States have occurred as a result of international travel—when unvaccinated individuals are infected in other countries and return to the United States. A growing number of parents in the United States are refusing to vaccinate their children, resulting in a surge of measles cases.
For the full article, please visit www.pharmacytoday.org for the August 2019 issue of Pharmacy Today.