Regi—short for regimen—is Allergan’s first-ever digital booking platform for aesthetic treatments. That includes Allergan-branded medical aesthetics like Botox Cosmetic and CoolSculpting, but also spa treatments like facials, waxing, laser hair removal and massages.
Available only in New York and Los Angeles for now, Regi lists spas, salons and plastic surgeons, complete with insider tips and scoops. Each business is vetted by Regi team members who visit the locations. Consumers who want services create a log-in to request bookings or appointments and a Regi concierge handles the request and responds.
RELATED: Ready for Botox, millennials? Allergan has launched its first campaign targeting you
The platform is Allergan’s second to come out of its digital ventures unit called Project Moonwalker. Its first project is Spotlyte, a digital content hub with information on medical aesthetics treatments, live chat and a connection to service providers.
The two projects align exactly with Allergan’s goal to break down two key barriers in medical aesthetics: lack of information and access to providers. Spotlyte addresses the lack of information, while Regi seeks to provide local access.
Alexandra Wilkis Wilson, senior vice president of consumer strategy and innovation at Allergan, said the company believes breaking those down has the potential to double the market in the next five to seven years.
“There is a clear demand for digital marketplaces and technology companies that are fulfilling consumer demand via immediate access to goods and services,” she said in an email interview. “... But there was no one place where a beauty enthusiast could book both a massage and an injectable treatment within one platform. With the launch of Regi, Allergan will interact directly with new consumers, many of which we expect to be urban, beauty-oriented millennial women.”
RELATED: Just in time for summer, Allergan brings back Real Housewife to promote fat-freezing treatment
While Allergan’s Regi team vets the spa and salon listings, healthcare providers listed must also have an active Allergan account and provide a variety of Allergan products “as well as embody the Allergan spirit and demonstrate an understanding of technology and social media,” Wilson said.