The pharmacy community suffered another disappointment at the hands of the Trump administration when a planned end to “safe harbor” protections under the federal anti-kickback statute for the rebates prescription drug manufacturers pay to PBMs was scuttled. The ambitious proposal reportedly could not withstand fears it would increase premiums for Medicare Part D beneficiaries—a frequent PBM talking point. Advocates for direct and indirect remuneration (DIR) reform were still reeling from May’s abandonment of a CMS Medicare rule requiring all price concessions to be assessed at point of sale.
With all executive avenues seemingly blocked, a pharmacy community hungry for relief from retroactive DIR fees now turns to Congress for action.
The CMS proposed rule would have applied to 2020 Part D plans. “We expected or hoped that the CMS action would be the route that would finally alleviate the pharmacy DIR fees,” said B. Douglas Hoey, RPh, MBA, CEO of the National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA). Assessed weeks or months after Part D beneficiaries’ prescriptions are filled, retroactive DIR fees complicate pharmacies’ decisions about staffing and whether to expand or even keep open a business. Further, patients pay higher out-of-pocket costs without benefiting from these price concessions at the pharmacy counter.
“However, we had contingency plans in place and worked with members of Congress to introduce legislation that would eliminate retroactive pharmacy DIR fees,” Hoey added. A coalition led by NCPA that includes APhA is advocating for the passage of the Phair Pricing Act (H.R. 1034 and S. 640). The bill is sponsored by Reps. Doug Collins (R-GA) and Vincente Gonzalez (R-TX) and Sen. John Kennedy (R-LA). DIR reform advocates are also working with the U.S. Senate Finance Committee to include the elimination of retroactive fees in its drug pricing legislation.
There is appetite to rein in PBMs on the Hill. In June, 105 Members of the U.S. House of Representatives and 28 U.S. Senators sent letters to President Trump to express their disappointment that DIR fee reform was not included in the finalized Medicare rule.
Hoey urges pharmacists to stay engaged. “Keep on sharing with [your] elected officials, whether it’s pharmacy DIRs or other ways PBMs are costing the system money,” he said. Tell them how your business is affected, but “emphasize the impact it’s having on voters, on consumers. Take that to the next step to translate to that legislator how pharmacy DIRs affect constituents.”