An electronic tool can help community pharmacists identify gaps in therapy and improve medication recommendations for patients with diabetes, according to a study published online in the Journal of the American Pharmacists Association on May 20, 2019. The Realo Diabetes Optimization Tool (RDOT), developed by Williams and colleagues, assessed patients’ medication profiles for adherence to the American Diabetes Association (ADA) 2018 Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes guidelines and detected areas for potential interventions.
“Workflow pace and complexity can limit the time community-based pharmacists have to dedicate to clinically evaluating medication regimens,” wrote the study authors. “Developing and integrating an electronic tool in the dispensing workflow could guide community-based pharmacists in managing patients with diabetes according to treatment guidelines.”
How does RDOT work?
When a pharmacist verifies a medication for a patient with diabetes, an Rx edit programmed into the pharmacy’s dispensing software alerts the pharmacist to access RDOT through a bookmarked link on their browser. RDOT guides the pharmacist to evaluate the patient’s medication profile for adherence to ADA’s guidelines, checking mainly for use of aspirin, statin, and ACEI/ARB.
The pharmacist then documents the identified medication therapy problems (MTPs) and related interventions generated by the online tool. From there, the pharmacist can follow up with the patient or health care provider, giving recommendations for medication therapy as necessary.
The study
During the 50-day study period from January to February 2018, five pharmacists from three Realo Discount Drugs pharmacy locations in Jacksonville, NC, used RDOT 788 times. RDOT identified a total of 657 MTPs in patients with diabetes involving absence of aspirin (n = 371 [47.1%]), statin (n = 187 [23.7%]), or ACEI/ARB (n = 99 [12.6%]) use.
Through RDOT, pharmacists sent recommendations for 396 (60.1%) of the identified MTPs. Of these recommendations, 198 were for aspirin therapy, 142 were for statins, and 56 were for ACEI/ARB. The remaining MTPs were not addressed due to time constraints, experience with the provider being unresponsive, and previous documentation for the identified intervention.
By the end of the study, 74 recommendations (18.7%) had received responses from the patient’s primary care provider. Responses included patient ineligible for recommended therapy (n = 32), patient already taking the medication (n = 17), recommendation accepted (n = 15), and other (n = 10).
Pharmacist feedback and limitations
In general, the pharmacists involved in the study felt the electronic tool was easily accessible and aided in identifying MTPs in patients with diabetes. However, the tool was not directly integrated into the pharmacy’s dispensing software system. The requirement to access RDOT on a separate platform may have prevented pharmacists to use the tool more frequently.
Further studies can innovate on the tool’s integration into dispensing workflow, and other community pharmacies can incorporate similar processes to improve how pharmacists manage patients with diabetes.