It’s been years since the Department of Justice charged two Heritage Pharma executives in a generics price-fixing probe. Now, in the wake of a lawsuit filed by 44 states against 20 drugmakers, Sen. Bernie Sanders and Rep. Elijah Cummings say it’s time for the agency to get moving with its investigation and potential prosecution, including a probe into whether generic companies obstructed an earlier investigation.
In a letter to U.S. Attorney General William Barr and assistant attorney general for antitrust Makan Delrahim, Sen. Sanders and Rep. Cummings urged the DoJ to prioritize a generic drug price-fixing investigation and “pursue enforcement if warranted.” Two years ago, the DoJ charged two former Heritage execs as part of an “ongoing federal antitrust investigation,” the lawmakers pointed out, but the agency has been mostly quiet on the issue since then.
The DoJ did announce a $225,000 criminal penalty against Heritage, which the lawmakers said is “wholly insufficient” to deter future misconduct. The company also paid more than $7 million in a separate civil resolution. Aside from potential price-fixing, the lawmakers also want the DoJ to investigate whether certain companies obstructed their 2014 probe into the issue. They obtained—and published—an email from an unnamed sender to former Heritage CEO Jeff Glazer saying that representatives for top generic companies Mylan and Teva—plus the industry's trade group—were in agreement to respond to the lawmakers' requests for information with “polite f-u" letters. A Teva spokeswoman said the company "has been cooperating with all investigations and vigorously denies any of the alleged wrongdoing that has been circulated in the media." Free Daily Newsletter Like this story? Subscribe to FiercePharma! Biopharma is a fast-growing world where big ideas come along daily. Our subscribers rely on FiercePharma as their must-read source for the latest news, analysis and data on drugs and the companies that make them. Sign up today to get pharma news and updates delivered to your inbox and read on the go. SUBSCRIBE NOW Image courtesy of Sen. Sanders and Rep. Cummings
The lawmakers' latest letter comes in the wake of last month's lawsuit from 44 states against Teva Pharmaceutical Industries and 19 other drugmakers for alleged price-fixing on more than 100 meds. If the states' allegations are true, “civil enforcement will not be sufficient to protect consumers or businesses that compete fairly, maintain the integrity of our economic system, or deter anticompetitive conduct in the future,” Sen. Sanders and Rep. Cummings wrote. The companies have denied wrongdoing.
In their probe, states dug up “evidence that Teva and other companies coordinated with each other to mislead our offices’ investigation in 2014 into suspicious price increases of generic drugs," Sen. Sanders and Rep. Cummings wrote. The drugmakers' reasoning for raising prices—shortages, regulatory fees and more—were “grossly misleading” at best and “false statements to Congress” at worst, the lawmakers wrote.
The lawmakers asked the DoJ to update on its efforts by next Friday.