Award-winning health and pharma agency creative director Rich Levy joins independent agency Klick Health today as its new chief creative officer after almost a decade helming the creative efforts at FCB Health.
Levy was drawn to Klick's entrepreneurial, hacker spirit—and its mission to solve so-called impossible problems by looking at them in new ways. He’s also looking forward to working at an independent agency where he can “stay incredibly close to the work” and leave behind some of the issues that come with working at a large holding company, he said. FCB Health is owned by Interpublic Group, one of the “Big Four” agency conglomerates.
RELATED: Klick Health spills its secrets in new pharma marketing playbook
“With innovation, data and science and bringing my creative storytelling to that, there was an opportunity to do work that was never done before in the industry, and that’s very exciting to me,” he said.
Klick staffers and executives are just as excited to have Levy on board.
“He’s someone we’ve admired from afar for a long time. When we actually got to meet him, [we] realized what a great guy he is, and an amazing cultural fit for us,” said Glenn Zujew, executive vice president for creative and medical at Klick.
Zujew, who previously served as executive creative director, will take on a new role yet to be detailed. For now, his job is helping Levy navigate his beginning days and clearing the way for him to “fly as high as he can,” Zujew said.
RELATED: Healthcare ad agencies of the future? Klick Health says disruption needed
Levy, who previously worked in consumer marketing—he created the Verizon “Can you hear me now?” tagline—is now an avowed healthcare creative. He said he would never go back.
“In consumer advertising, I always felt like I was selling a product; now I feel like I’m solving a problem. This is much more meaningful,” he said.
Under Levy’s guidance, FCB Health won healthcare agency of the year in 2017 at the Cannes Lions Health festival, as well as agency of the year in 2018 at the Clio Awards and a host of other accolades. Last year, he served as pharma jury president at Cannes Lions Health.