Newly released data show that drug companies shipped billions of doses of oxycodone and hydrocodone across the United States as the nation's drug epidemic skyrocketed. The data, which comes from a DEA database, reveals that companies distributed 8.4 billion doses of the opioids in 2006 and 12.6 billion in 2012, for a total of about 76 billion oxycodone and hydrocodone doses during the 7-year period. The Washington Post analysis of the database also found that six companies distributed 75% of the opioid analgesics during that period: McKesson Corp., Walgreens, Cardinal Health, AmerisourceBergen, CVS Health, and Walmart. Additionally, just three companies manufactured nearly 90% of the opioids: SpecGx, a subsidiary of Mallinckrodt; ­Actavis Pharma; and Par Pharmaceutical, a subsidiary of Endo Pharmaceuticals. Purdue Pharma, which many blame for sparking the opioid epidemic with its introduction of oxycodone (OxyContin) in the 1990s, was fourth among manufacturers, with about a 3% market share. Nearly 2,000 cities, towns, and counties are now suing these 10 companies, along with a number of others, in federal court in Cleveland, asserting that they conspired to flood the United States with opioids. For their part, the companies say the epidemic stems from overprescribing by physicians and pharmacies and from customers who abused the drugs. Until this week, the contents of the Automation of Reports and Consolidated Order System (ARCOS) database has been sealed under a judicial protective order. On Monday, after a year-long legal battle by the Washington Post and HD Media, U.S. District Judge Dan Polster removed the protective order for a portion of ARCOS. "The data provides statistical insights that help pinpoint the origins and spread of the opioid epidemic—an epidemic that thousands of communities across the country argue was both sparked and inflamed by opioid manufacturers, distributors, and pharmacies," said Paul T. Farrell Jr. of West Virginia, co-lead counsel for the plaintiffs.