FDA approved a new treatment, romosozumab-aqqg (Evenity—Amgen), for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women at high risk of fracture, such as those who have a history of osteoporotic fracture or have multiple risk factors for fracture, as well as patients who are intolerant to or have not had success with other osteoporosis therapies. Romosozumab-aqqg is a humanized monoclonal antibody that increases new bone formation by blocking the effects of sclerostin, a protein that inhibits bone formation.
“This approval is great news for patients and physicians because it gives them another much-needed treatment option to help reduce the risk of life-changing fractures,” said Elizabeth Thompson, CEO, National Osteoporosis Foundation, in a statement.
Approval of romosozumab-aqqg was based on two Phase III clinical trials that demonstrated the drug’s safety and efficacy in more than 11,000 women with postmenopausal osteoporosis. The first trial, FRAME, randomized 7,180 patients to either 1 year of treatment with romosozumab-aqqg or placebo. All patients were then transitioned to 1 year of treatment with denosumab, another osteoporosis therapy that reduces bone loss.
The study found that romosozumab-aqqg significantly lowered the risk of new vertebral fracture by 73% compared with placebo. In addition, the drug significantly increased bone mineral density (BMD) at the lumbar spine, total hip, and femoral neck after the first year. BMD continued to increase throughout treatment with denosumab during the second year of the study.
The second trial, ARCH, randomized 4,093 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis and previous fracture history to either 1 year of romosozumab-aqqg treatment or 1 year of alendronate (70 mg/wk), another osteoporosis therapy. Both groups were then transitioned to 1 year of alendronate treatment.
Compared with patients who received only alendronate, those in the romosozumab-aqqg group showed a 50% lower risk of new vertebral fracture. These patients also had a significantly lower risk of clinical fracture (i.e., nonvertebral and symptomatic vertebral fracture) and increased BMD.
For the full article, please visit www.pharmacytoday.org for the July 2019 issue of Pharmacy Today.