Nearly one-half of adolescent women diagnosed with a sexually transmitted infection (STI) in the emergency department do not fill their outpatient prescriptions for antimicrobial therapy, according to a research letter published in JAMA Pediatrics on May 28, 2019.
“We were astonished to find that teenagers’ rates of filling STI prescriptions were so low,” said senior study author, Monika K. Goyal, MD, MSCE, assistant chief of Children’s Division of Emergency Medicine and Trauma Services, in a statement. “Our findings demonstrate the imperative need to identify innovative methods to improve treatment adherence for this high-risk population.”
The retrospective cohort study involved adolescents aged 13 to 19 years who visited one of two emergency departments affiliated with a large, urban, tertiary care children’s hospital from January 1, 2016, to December 31, 2017. The patients either tested positive for chlamydia or were diagnosed with pelvic inflammatory disease and were consequently prescribed antimicrobial treatment.
Of the 696 emergency department visits for diagnosed STIs during the study period, 208 adolescents were given outpatient prescriptions for antimicrobial treatment. However, researchers found that only 54.1% of those prescriptions were filled.
“Teenagers may face a number of hurdles when it comes to STI treatment, including out-of-pocket cost, access to transportation, and confidentiality concerns,” said Goyal. Adolescents may also face conflicts between clinic hours and their work and school schedules. Further studies are needed to determine why so many adolescents don’t fill their prescriptions for antimicrobial STI treatment.
According to CDC, young people aged 15 to 24 years make up one-half of the people diagnosed with STIs every year. Compared with older adults, sexually active adolescents aged 15 to 19 years have a higher risk of acquiring STIs, and adolescent females, in particular, may be more susceptible to infection.
Future initiatives need to focus on developing targeted interventions that promote adherence to STI treatment among adolescent women.