As Condé Nast—the media content conglomerate behind premium brands such as Self, Allure, Glamour and GQ—moves more into video, it’s taking pharma advertisers along.
The first Condé Nast Health NewFront recently unveiled a new lineup of condition-focused programming and an original, customizable content studio that can generate original content. And it's adding data-driven targeting into its Condé Nast prime-time video programming, which delivers a broader audience than the health-specific channels.
The initial programming lineup—under what the company calls its Modern Day Health Network—will be divided into health-focused channels across nine conditions: depression, pregnancy, multiple sclerosis, eye health, diabetes, psoriasis, migraine, asthma and HIV.
“Viewership is shifting from linear television into these new and emerging platforms,” said Carrie Moore, head of health at Condé Nast, adding, "We’re doubling down on the amount of health content we create in a way that can scale.”
RELATED: New Condé Nast division aims to lure pharma with patient targeting, branded content
The video health programming is meant to offer pharma marketers a way to handle three of their current needs, she said. They need to maintain the scale of television and other traditional media, align with premium content and use data and analytics to complement TV buys.
Through efforts such as Condé Nast Pharma marketing solutions, which launched two years ago, the media company already has solid pharma and healthcare credibility and relationships within the industry.
RELATED: Self magazine reorganization opens up key pharma marketing opportunities
Now, Condé Nast believes its stepped-up programming agenda—along with “The Studio," where it can create customized branded or unbranded video content managed from concept and storyboarding through medical and legal review—can address the demand it's already seeing in the marketplace.
“The whole Health NewFront was driven by demand," Moore said. "Last year, honestly, we could barely keep up with the demand. It’s just where things are and it’s what people want."
Some of the specific health series Condé Nast announced in its NewFront presentation are returnees under the Self banner. “Body Stories,” “Ask a Doctor,” and “Patient to Patient” are all renewals, while Self is putting up new series that include “Undercover MD,” “Life With and Without” and “Love Your Patient.”
Other Condé Nast brands joining the health push are Allure, with the series “Work It,” featuring women with health conditions managing their careers; and Epicurious, with the series “At Home with Anna,” a cooking show for people with health-related dietary restrictions.