Allergan is coordinating its denials—in this case, two “Denial” ad campaigns for its CoolSculpting body contouring system. Its latest, “Bikini Denial,” with “Real Housewives of New York” star Sonja Morgan, follows its “Denim Denial” push that ran last year starring “Sex in the City” actress Kristin Davis.
It’s Morgan’s second campaign for CoolSculpting after headlining a fall campaign educating women about the procedure and encouraging them to consider it self-care. She and Davis join Olympic ice skater Johnny Weir and golf pro Ian Poulter, who rep for the brand helping to target men as part of its “Not Cool Vs Cool” umbrella campaign.
Connecting the denial-themed campaigns was purposeful, CoolSculpting team members said in an email interview, and they aligned the new work with the larger marketing initiative begun with the denim campaign. Similar to that earlier work, which recognizes that women hold onto jeans in hopes of fitting into them again, "Bikini Denial" recognizes the the feeling a woman might get "when realizing that swimsuit season has snuck up on her and she is not prepared to bare it all at the beach or pool,” they said.
Part of the reason for the pre-summer push has to do with the CoolSculpting procedure. Because it takes about three months to see results, Allergan is encouraging women to learn more now, the team said.
RELATED: Getting Real: Allergan taps Real Housewife to helm new CoolSculpting effort
Morgan shared her personal story at a New York event last week and will continue to talk about her experience on social media. As with the earlier campaign, consumers can again enter a sweepstakes to win a free CoolSculpting treatment.
Allergan laid out expectations for the CoolSculpting brand last year, estimating it will surpass $1 billion in annual global sales by 2025, as part of a total projected $7 billion to $8 billion aesthetics business haul anchored by blockbuster brand Botox. CoolSculpting picked up an FDA indication to treat jawline fat in October, expanding its list of FDA-approved treatment areas that already includes bra fat, back fat, thigh fat, abdomen fat and more.