Use of short-acting exenatide with and without basal insulin in noncritically ill hospitalized patients improved glycemic control and was well tolerated, according to data published in Diabetes Care.
“Increasing data from several randomized controlled studies indicate that incretin agents such as the DPP-4 [dipeptidyl peptidase-4] inhibitors and GLP-1 [glucagon-like peptide-1] receptor agonists alone or in combination with basal insulin are as effective as basal–bolus (multidose) insulin regimens for the management of patients with type 2 diabetes,” according to Guillermo Umpierrez, MD, study author from the Department of Medicine at Emory University.
“Although the short-acting exenatide was used in this study, we have several daily and once-weekly GLP-1 receptor agonists we can choose from. Our study indicates that these agents are safe for hospital use,” he said.
Study authors conducted a multicenter, open-label pilot study comparing the efficacy and safety of exenatide alone or in combination with basal insulin in 150 noncritically ill hospitalized patients with type 2 diabetes.
The patients were recruited from four academic hospitals and were between 18 and 80 years old. Each had a known history of type 2 diabetes treated with diet, oral agents, and/or low-dose insulin at a total daily dose of less than 0.5 units/kg, as well as a blood glucose level between 140 mg/dL and 400 mg/dL. The patients were randomized to exenatide 5 μg twice daily (n = 48), exenatide 5 μg twice daily plus basal insulin (n = 52), or a basal–bolus insulin regimen (n = 52).
The patients treated with exenatide plus basal insulin had the lowest overall mean hospital blood glucose level (154.1 mg/dL), followed by the basal–bolus insulin regimen (166.1 mg/dL) and exenatide alone (177.1 mg/dL). The analysis showed a significant difference in mean blood glucose levels (−23 mg/dL) between treatment with exenatide plus basal insulin and exenatide alone. Patients on the exenatide plus basal insulin also had the highest proportion of blood glucose readings within the target range of 70 mg/dL to 180 mg/dL compared with the other two groups.
The rates of hypoglycemia were not significantly different between the groups, with blood glucose levels less than 70 mg/dL occurring in 12% of those on the basal–bolus regimen, 6% on exenatide plus basal insulin, and no patients on exenatide alone. Nausea or vomiting occurred in more patients in the exenatide (10%) and exenatide plus basal (11%) groups compared with those in the basal–bolus group (2%).
For the full article, please visit www.pharmacytoday.org for the July 2019 issue of Pharmacy Today.