Another drugmaker from Europe, where governments are concerned about the effects of climate change, has achieved an aggressive goal to walk more softly on the earth. Vetter says from this point forward, all of its nine German sites will be powered by CO 2 neutral energy from certified renewable energy sources.
The Ravensburg, Germany-based CDMO, which says sustainability is a pillar of its corporate credo, has four manufacturing sites in Germany, as well as a site for visual inspection and logistics and four administrative facilities.
“The supply of our German sites with green electricity is an important part of our company-wide program for environmental protection, energy management, and occupational health and safety,” Vetter Managing Director Thomas Otto said in a statement. “Our aim is to act holistically and develop our multi-faceted initiatives in these areas on a continuous basis.”
RELATED: Novo manufacturing will be powered by 100% renewable energy by 2020
Vetter’s largest sustainability project recently is at its center for visual inspection and logistics in Ravensburg, which uses a block heating and power plant along with geothermal and solar energy.
The next goal for the CDMO will be to offset the companywide use of natural gas by 2030, an accomplishment that will leave it completely CO 2 neutral. It says unavoidable CO 2 will be offset by investments in “high-quality” climate protection projects. Vetter has only clinical manufacturing in the U.S.
Vetter’s achievement comes even as Novo Nordisk recently announced that with an investment in a solar power operation in North Carolina, it will be able to power all of its U.S. production with renewable electricity sources by 2020. Moving forward, it intends to achieve zero CO 2 emissions from all operations and transportation by 2030.
The goals being met and set by by European drugmakers comes even as the U.S. under President Donald Trump has backed away from aggressive climate change initiatives, including its abandonment of the Paris Climate Agreement. Some U.S. companies continue to be dedicated to reducing emissions even as the administration eases some rules for businesses.