After eight years of trying to gain representation of Boots’s pharmacists, the Pharmacists’ Defence Association Union has signed its first agreement with the company.
Source: Shutterstock.com The PDA Union will now have collective bargaining rights for negotiation on Boots pharmacists’ pay, hours and holiday
The Pharmacists’ Defence Association (PDA) Union has signed its first voluntary recognition agreement with Boots.
Representing PDA Union members who are store-based Boots pharmacists and pre-registration pharmacists, the PDA Union will now have collective bargaining rights for negotiation on pay, hours and holiday, as well as consultative meetings on a range of other topics.
The formal agreement means that the PDA Union, which will have one regional representative per region, will negotiate the annual pay for these roles within Boots, starting with the forthcoming annual pay review for the financial year 2019/2020.
A joint negotiating board made up of a smaller subset of PDA Union representatives will also exist for the purpose of negotiations relating to pay, hours and holidays.
The agreement includes a list of policy items, including bonus payments and human resource policies, which Boots will inform the PDA Union about if there are any changes.
“This is the start of a new, more positive relationship between Boots UK and the PDA Union,” said Anne Higgins, director of stores, Scotland and Northern Ireland, and co-chair of the agreement meetings.
“We look forward to working with them with a new spirit of partnership in the years ahead, working together for the long-term sustainable success of our pharmacists and Boots UK.”
Mark Pitt, assistant general secretary at the PDA Union, added: “Our objective is to work with Boots UK to create a positive employee relations environment, where the voice of pharmacists is heard, and our members are able to contribute to the business as respected health professionals.”
It has now been eight years since the PDA Union originally wrote to Boots asking the company to voluntarily recognise it for collective bargaining purposes. Previously, pharmacists at the UK’s largest chain of pharmacies were represented by the Boots Pharmacists’ Association.