With cases of measles continuing to climb in the United States and Americans embarking on summer travel, CDC is reminding health care practitioners and the public about MMR vaccination recommendations for international travelers as well those traveling to U.S. areas with ongoing measles outbreaks.
Certain areas of New York City and New York state are experiencing large on-going outbreaks, and officials have issued guidance for individuals who will spend time in those communities.
-See guidance for Rockland County
-See guidance for New York City
Most of the measles cases in the United States have been brought on as a result of international travel, when unvaccinated individuals get infected in other countries and come back to the United States.
According to CDC, many countries that are also popular tourist destinations are experiencing measles outbreaks, including Israel, Thailand, Vietnam, Japan, Ukraine, the Philippines, and more.
CDC has issued a Global Travel Notice: Watch (Level 1) for these outbreaks.
Below are CDC’s complete recommendations for domestic and international travel:
The MMR vaccination recommendations for international travel have not changed.
Infants younger than 12 months old:
Get an early dose at 6 to 11 months.
Follow the recommended schedule and get another dose at 12 to 15 months and a final dose at 4 to 6 years.
Children older than 12 months old:
Get first dose immediately.
Get second dose 28 days after first dose.
Teens and adults with no evidence of immunity:
Get first dose immediately.
Get second dose 28 days after first dose.
Acceptable presumptive evidence of immunity against measles includes at least one of the following: written documentation of adequate vaccination, laboratory evidence of immunity, laboratory confirmation of measles, or birth in the United States before 1957.
Patients who need the MMR vaccine should be fully vaccinated at least 2 weeks before departure. If the trip is less than 2 weeks away and the patient is not protected against measles, give him or her a dose of MMR vaccine.
CDC’s MMR vaccination recommendations for persons residing in or visiting domestic measles outbreak areas within the United States have also not changed. Those who live in or are traveling to areas in the United States where there is ongoing, community-wide transmission of measles should be up to date on the MMR vaccine. To decide whether to vaccinate an infant visitor younger than 12 months, health care practitioners should follow local health department guidance for the affected area (e.g., if no recommendation was made to vaccinate infant residents, do not vaccinate infant visitors).
For more measles outbreak resources, visit CDC’s toolkit. CDC said new resources are expected to be added.