Some Big Pharma investors wanted to know whether drug prices are rising because executives personally benefit from the hikes. But when they put that question up for a vote, their fellow shareholders turned them away. In a series of annual meetings at top drugmakers, shareholders rejected calls for more information on executive compensation—namely, whether price hikes directly fueled increases in C-suite pay.
Faith-based investor group ICCR had submitted proposals to AbbVie, Celgene, Johnson & Johnson, Merck & Co., Pfizer and Vertex requesting information about how price hikes feed sales goals and other exec pay metrics. It was the second straight year ICCR had done so—and again, the larger group of shareholders rejected the idea.
AbbVie, J&J, Pfizer and Merck shareholders turned away the proposals, an ICCR representative said via email; support ranged from 22% to 29%. Vertex shareholders are set to vote on the proposal June 5.
The shareholder resolutions asked drugmakers whether they use price hikes to meet sales goals, whether boards must approve price hikes, and how compensation committees use revenue goals to determine incentive pay. RELATED: Investors to AbbVie, J&J, Merck and more: Fork over info on pricing and executive pay
ICCR has said that the companies’ routine price hikes pose long-term regulatory and reputational risks, and the group has posed the question as to whether incentive pay goals actually encourage executives to raise prices. Free Daily Newsletter Like this story? Subscribe to FiercePharma! Biopharma is a fast-growing world where big ideas come along daily. Our subscribers rely on FiercePharma as their must-read source for the latest news, analysis and data on drugs and the companies that make them. Sign up today to get pharma news and updates delivered to your inbox and read on the go. SUBSCRIBE NOW In 2018, AbbVie paid its CEO Richard Gonzalez $21 million, while Celgene’s CEO Mark Alles made $16.2 million. Pfizer’s former CEO Ian Read pulled in $19.5 million in compensation; J&J’s Alex Gorsky scored $20 million; and Merck’s Ken Frazier earned $20.9 million. Vertex CEO Jeffrey Leiden snagged a pay raise to $18.8 million.
Last year, the proposals won between 21% and 28% of shareholder support. RELATED: AbbVie hands CEO $21M—and a hefty bonus—even as executive pay scrutiny mounts